\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename writing-schedule.info
@settitle Writing Schedule Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents writing-schedule.el, an Emacs package that turns a
weekly writing-block table into org agenda events and an iCalendar file.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Blaine Mooers.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute, and modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Writing Schedule: (writing-schedule). Weekly writing blocks to agenda and iCalendar.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Writing Schedule Manual
@subtitle From a weekly table to your agenda and calendar
@author Blaine Mooers
@page
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Writing Schedule

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What the package does.
* Installation::                Loading the package.
* The Table Format::            How to write the weekly table.
* Commands::                    The interactive commands.
* Customization::               Variables you can set.
* Key Bindings::                A suggested prefix keymap.
* Calendar Sync::               Exporting to iCalendar and Outlook.
* Command Line::                Using the package without Emacs.
* Testing::                     Running the test suite.
* Function Index::              Index of documented functions.
* Variable Index::              Index of documented variables.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

You keep a weekly plan as an org table. Each row is a time block, each
column after the first is a day, and each filled cell holds a letter (A,
B, C, or D) that names the project worked on during that block. This
package reads that table and writes a dated file of events for each
week, so past weeks are archived rather than overwritten. Those events
feed the org agenda, and org's own iCalendar exporter turns them into a
file that Outlook Web or any calendar application can import.

The table is a seating chart. You decide who sits where, meaning which
project fills which block. The generator is the usher that walks the
chart, stamps each seat with a real date and time, and hands the guest
list to your calendar.

@cindex related work
The package @code{org-timeblock} gives org-agenda an interactive
timeblock view of scheduled tasks. This package is complementary,
because it generates and archives a week from a reusable template and
exports it to iCalendar, rather than viewing timestamps that already
exist, so the two pair well.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Place @file{writing-schedule.el} on your load path and require it.

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/writing-schedule")
(require 'writing-schedule)

;; Where the dated weekly files are archived.
(setq writing-schedule-directory "~/org/writing-schedule/")

;; A timezone string keeps exported events anchored correctly.
(setq org-icalendar-timezone "America/Chicago")
@end lisp

The package depends only on Emacs 27.1 or later and on the built-in
@code{org} and @code{ox-icalendar} libraries. No external packages are
required to generate schedules or export calendars.

@node The Table Format
@chapter The Table Format

A schedule table has one label column and one column per day. The first
row names the days. Section header rows group the blocks. Time-block
rows carry a time range in the label column and a short uppercase code in
each day cell that is in use. Legend rows at the bottom associate each
code with a description, which goes in the first column after the code
and the colon, such as @samp{A: docking}. That description becomes the
event title.

A code is not limited to a single letter, and a table is not limited to
four projects. Any short uppercase code works, so you can mix projects
with recurring tasks, for example @samp{EM} for email or @samp{W} for
your daily words. Uppercase is what marks a code, because a capitalized
word such as @samp{Generative} is read as a section header. See
@file{examples/projects-and-tasks.org} for a mixed example.

@example
| Time <l>    | M | Tu | W | Th | F | Sa |
|-------------+---+----+---+----+---+----|
| Generative: |   |    |   |    |   |    |
| 04:00-05:30 | A | B  | A | B  | B |    |
| 05:45-07:15 | A | B  | A | B  | B | B  |
|-------------+---+----+---+----+---+----|
| A: docking  |   |    |   |    |   |    |
| B: radiation|   |    |   |    |   |    |
@end example

The parser is tolerant of irregular spacing and of single-digit hours,
so @samp{9:15 - 10:45}, @samp{04:00-5:30}, and even @samp{15:00-16: 30}
with a space after the colon are all accepted. A cell letter may be lower
case; it is normalized to upper case. An empty cell means that no block
is scheduled for that day and time.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@deffn Command writing-schedule-insert-template n
Insert a blank weekly table for @var{n} projects, where @var{n} is
clamped to the range one to twenty-six. The scaffold uses single-letter
codes, and you can rename the legend rows to your own short uppercase
codes, such as @samp{EM} or @samp{EX}. The default time blocks come from
@code{writing-schedule-default-slots}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-generate
Parse the table at point and write the schedule file. For each letter in
use, you are prompted for a project code and a description. When the
legend rows carry a description, it is offered as the default. You then
pick any day inside the target week, and the command snaps back to that
week's Monday. The command writes a dated file for that week, such as
@file{writing-2026-01-19.org}, inside @code{writing-schedule-directory},
optionally adds it to @code{org-agenda-files}, and offers to export an
iCalendar file.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-export-ics &optional file
Export @var{file}, or the current week's dated file when @var{file} is
omitted, to an iCalendar file through org's @code{ox-icalendar} back-end.
The @file{.ics} file is written beside the org file, so it is archived by
week as well. Return the absolute path of the resulting file.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-add-to-agenda &optional file
Add @var{file}, or the current week's dated file when @var{file} is
omitted, to @code{org-agenda-files}. The operation is idempotent.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-open-week &optional pick-date
Open an archived weekly file. By default, choose from the archived weeks
with completion, listed newest first, so a recent week is quick to reach.
With a prefix argument @var{pick-date}, or when nothing is archived yet,
prompt for a date instead and open the file for the week that contains
it.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-open-recent
Open the most recent archived weekly file.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-new-week-from-template
Start the current week from a saved context template. Choose a template
from @code{writing-schedule-template-directory}, copy it to this week's
working table in @code{writing-schedule-table-directory}, open that copy,
and place point in the table so you can run
@code{writing-schedule-generate} right away. The copy is separate from
the template, so the library stays intact.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-generate-from-template
Select a saved table and generate a week's schedule from it directly.
Choose one of the tables in @code{writing-schedule-template-directory},
then generate the dated schedule of events for the org agenda, with the
usual prompts for the project mapping and the week. The saved table is
read but not modified. Use this when a table already matches the coming
week, and use @code{writing-schedule-new-week-from-template} when you
want to copy a table and edit a few letters first.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-timeblock-sheets &optional per-day
Generate printable time-block sheets from the table at point. Choose the
week and the output, meaning the PDF, an editable org file, or both. With
a prefix argument or non-nil PER-DAY, write one PDF per day, else one PDF
for the week. Each day becomes a two-page sheet whose first column holds
the planned blocks, whose top carries the code key, and whose other
columns are blank. Each block is drawn as a box with heavy lines that
spans its time range, and a block that crosses the page break is left
open at the edge so it reads as one block. As the day changes you write a
revised plan in the next column, which gives the schedule its flexibility
and antifragility. The org output holds one table of events per day, so
you can edit it and export the week to HTML or other formats. PDFs
compile when a LaTeX compiler is available.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-save-template-table &optional name
Save the org table at point as a template named NAME in the template
directory, so a table you have customized for a particular kind of week
joins the library. An existing @code{#+TITLE:} line is preserved,
otherwise the title is taken from NAME. Put the project description in
the first column of each legend row, for example a first cell of
@code{A: docking}.
@end deffn

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-directory
The directory that holds one dated schedule file per week. Each
generated week is archived here under its own file.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-file-format
The format of a weekly file name. The @samp{%s} is replaced by the
Monday of the week in ISO form, giving a file such as
@file{writing-2026-01-19.org}. The default is @code{"writing-%s.org"}.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-template-directory
The directory of saved context templates, each an org file whose table
already has the letters assigned. The default is nil, which derives a
@file{templates} subdirectory of @code{writing-schedule-directory} each
time it is used, so setting the base directory is enough and the load
order does not matter. Set this only to place templates elsewhere.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-table-directory
The directory where @code{writing-schedule-new-week-from-template} copies
this week's working table. The default is nil, which derives a
@file{tables} subdirectory of @code{writing-schedule-directory}, keeping
input tables out of the way of the dated schedules and the agenda. Set
this only to place the working tables elsewhere.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-timeblock-start-hour
@defvrx {User Option} writing-schedule-timeblock-end-hour
The first and last hours shown on a printable time-block sheet. The
defaults are 4 and 23.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-timeblock-columns
The number of plan columns on a sheet, four by default. The first holds
the plan; the rest are blank for revisions as the day changes.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-timeblock-subrows
The number of writing rows per hour, five by default.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-latex-compiler
The program used to compile a sheet to PDF, @command{pdflatex} by default.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-sheets-directory
The directory for generated sheets. When nil, derive a @file{sheets}
subdirectory of @code{writing-schedule-directory}.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-use-todo
When non-nil, each generated event is a TODO headline, so the schedule
file also serves as a source of TODO items. Set it to nil for cleaner
iCalendar summaries. The default is @code{t}.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-todo-keyword
The keyword placed before each event when
@code{writing-schedule-use-todo} is non-nil. The default is @code{"TODO"}.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-add-to-agenda
When non-nil, each generated dated file is added to
@code{org-agenda-files}. The default is @code{t}.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} writing-schedule-default-slots
The sections and time blocks used by
@code{writing-schedule-insert-template}. Each element is a list whose
head is a section name and whose tail is a list of time ranges.
@end defvr

@node Key Bindings
@chapter Key Bindings

The package ships a prefix keymap that puts the commands on single keys.

@defvr {Variable} writing-schedule-command-map
A keymap binding @kbd{g} to @code{writing-schedule-generate}, @kbd{t} to
@code{writing-schedule-insert-template}, @kbd{o} to
@code{writing-schedule-open-week}, @kbd{r} to
@code{writing-schedule-open-recent}, @kbd{n} to
@code{writing-schedule-new-week-from-template}, @kbd{e} to
@code{writing-schedule-export-ics}, and @kbd{a} to
@code{writing-schedule-add-to-agenda}.
@end defvr

Bind it under any prefix you like. When @kbd{C-c w} is already your
writing prefix, nest it on a free key such as @kbd{c}.

@lisp
(with-eval-after-load 'writing-schedule
  (keymap-set my-writing-prefix "c" writing-schedule-command-map))
@end lisp

After that, @kbd{C-c w c r} opens the most recent week, and
@kbd{C-c w c o} opens a week by completion or, with a prefix argument, by
date.

@node Calendar Sync
@chapter Calendar Sync

Because the generated file holds ordinary org headlines with active
timestamps, org's iCalendar exporter turns each block into a timed
event. Run @code{writing-schedule-export-ics} to write the file, then
import it into Outlook Web through @emph{Add calendar} and @emph{Upload
from file}. The exporter writes a stable identifier into each headline,
so re-importing an edited week updates the matching events rather than
creating duplicates.

To feed the agenda, add your task file, the archive directory
@code{writing-schedule-directory}, and any project writing logs to
@code{org-agenda-files}. Pointing the agenda at the directory picks up
every dated week automatically, so all of them act as sources of TODO
items and timed blocks.

@node Command Line
@chapter Command Line

People who do not use Emacs can still produce a calendar from a template.
The @file{writing-schedule.sh} script uses Emacs only as an engine and
writes an iCalendar file for import into Apple Calendar or Outlook.

@example
./writing-schedule.sh list
./writing-schedule.sh generate three-projects 2026-01-21
./writing-schedule.sh deps
@end example

The script mirrors the package's capabilities. The commands are
@code{list} (print the templates), @code{weeks} (print the archived
weeks, newest first), @code{template} (print or write a blank template),
@code{generate} (write a dated schedule and an @file{.ics} file for the
week that contains the given date), @code{export} (export an existing
schedule to @file{.ics}), and @code{save} (save a table file into the
template library). Paths are configured through the environment variables
@env{WS_DIR}, @env{WS_OUT_DIR}, @env{WS_TEMPLATE_DIR}, @env{WS_TABLE_DIR},
and @env{WS_TIMEZONE}. The script drives the batch functions below, which
can also be called directly through @command{emacs --batch}.

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-list-templates &optional directory
Print the available templates to standard output, one per line.
@var{directory} defaults to @code{writing-schedule-template-directory}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-list-weeks &optional directory
Print the archived weekly files to standard output, newest first.
@var{directory} overrides @code{writing-schedule-directory}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-insert-template n &optional file
Write or print a blank template for @var{n} projects. With @var{file},
write it there, otherwise print it to standard output.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-generate table week &optional out-dir
Generate a dated schedule and an iCalendar file from @var{table} for the
week that contains @var{week}. Letters are mapped to projects from the
table's legend rows, so no prompts are needed. @var{out-dir} overrides
@code{writing-schedule-directory}. For readable event titles, fill the
legend rows of the template, because those descriptions become the event
titles.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-save-template table-file name
Save the table in @var{table-file} into the template library under
@var{name}, wrapping it with the file's title or @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command writing-schedule-batch-timeblock-sheets table week &optional per-day out-dir format
Write printable time-block sheets from @var{table} for @var{week}.
Non-nil PER-DAY writes one PDF per day, else one for the week.
@var{out-dir} overrides the sheets directory. @var{format} is the string
@samp{pdf}, @samp{org}, or @samp{both}, and defaults to both.
@end deffn

@node Testing
@chapter Testing

The package ships with an ERT test suite split into unit tests and
integration tests, plus a Makefile. Run the whole suite with:

@example
make test
@end example

Run only one layer with @code{make test-unit} or
@code{make test-integration}. Measure line coverage with
@code{make coverage} after installing the test dependencies through
@code{make install-test-deps}. See @file{README.md} for the full
testing tutorial.

@node Function Index
@chapter Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@chapter Variable Index
@printindex vr

@bye
